MLCS-Project-HFRP-Model-Review

Original Paper: 
"Deep learning for enhanced risk management: a novel approach to analyzing financial reports" (PeerJ Computer Science Journal)

This paper presents a hybrid model that can offer a holistic view of financial risk. The researchers propose a Hybrid Financial Risk Predictor (HFRP) capable of dealing with both text and time-series data, which are common in financial data, that integrates deep learning architectures of CNNs and LSTMs to enhance the accuracy of financial risk predictions. 

Literature Review:
In industries today, many operations and processes have become heavily automated largely due to advances in technology and artificial intelligence. One of the most influential branches from these developments is the field of machine learning. Since its introduction into applied fields such as biology, medicine, and finance, researchers have since paved an extension from the models and work in this field to a more complex yet useful realm known as deep learning. 
	The capabilities of deep learning can be especially appreciated in the financial industry. Many financial processes, such as data-driven decision making, customer automation, and high frequency trading, are currently tied to deep learning models and methods that have enhanced their applications. In particular, risk management, which is the process of identifying, assessing, and mitigating potential threats to an organization’s assets and earnings, has a number of connections to deep learning that can be harnessed. In this analysis, I evaluate a novel architecture proposed by a paper published in PeerJ that incorporates deep learning CNN and LSTM architectures to improve financial risk prediction. 
	On a general standpoint, I chose this paper because I felt its architecture and its findings to be intriguing. While there are already a large sum of papers presenting novel deep learning frameworks for a variety of applications, only a select few extend past the basic frameworks and centralize on ensemble models or more traditional models such as convolutional neural networks. The paper, “Deep Learning for Enhanced Risk Management: a Novel Approach to Analyzing Financial Reports” stands out to me in that it proposes a hybrid financial risk predictor (HFRP) ensemble model that combines both the traditional convolutional neural network (CNN) and long-short term memory network (LSTM) to enhance its versatility to real-world financial data. The main goals of the paper’s research are to propose and advocate for a deep learning framework that takes structured data in financial reports and combines classification of the aforementioned data with natural language processing and neural networks to improve risk factor detection from financial text; essentially, improve the effectiveness of the risk management process via simplification and automation, while also minimizing the time needed to obtain useful, processed data. I feel that this paper shows promise in future improvements in risk management, which has led me to centralize on it. 
Furthermore, I feel that the field of risk management in general is very saturated and has a lot of potential to grow. Traditionally, financial risk management has relied heavily on traditional statistical models and manual analytical approaches. Previous papers involved in this have focused on classification, random forest algorithms for predictions via proposing weights to decision trees (Zhou and Wang, 2012), a non-linear, non-parametric forecast model (Khandani et al., 2010), and support vector machines (Wang et al., 2005). Recently, several papers have begun experimenting with deep neural architectures in this sector, including CNN and recurrent neural networks for robust fraud detection (Craja, Kim & Lessmann, 2020), reinforcement learning for financial risk predictions (Cui & Yao, 2024), and LSTM networks for capturing temporal, nonlinear patterns in time series data (Fischer & Krauss, 2018). Despite these developments, there remain unique limitations in each method, such as inferior scalability, overly excessive reliance on specific data types, and lack of model interpretability, which hinder their applicability to diverse financial contexts with real-time risk supervision and decision-making systems. In the broader academic literature of financial risk modeling and prediction, this paper sits on the precipice of extending the findings from a priori studies; it combines the strengths of CNNs on text data and LSTMs on time series data to overcome prior limitations of relying on one sole datatype. It also proposes harnessing advanced NLP techniques for feature extraction from financial disclosures, combating issues of interpretability, and recommends a GAN architecture to improve training quality and deep reinforcement learning to increase its adaptability to changing market conditions. All in all, the paper combines results and main architectures developed down the line, harnessing their strengths to offer a nuanced, effective approach to risk management, instilling its place as both a promising possibility for advancement in finance and a promising case for me to personally evaluate and extend its work. 
